Almirah
=======

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 3      

   user-guide
   tutorial
   writing-configs/index
   reference/index
   contributing
   code-of-conduct   
   changelog

almirah aids in the organization, maintenance, and usage of both
file-based and table-based datasets. Developed to handle neuroimaging
datasets, it provides data format conversion support for specific
modalities.

Out-of-the-box, almirah supports:

- BIDS specification for neuroimaging datasets.
- BIDS-like specification for genome sequence data.
- Interfacing with databases supported by SQLAlchemy.
- File format conversion for neuorimaging data.
- Lazy access of DataLad compatible datasets.

With some time on config writing, almirah can:

- Organize unformatted datasets.
- Query and filter across the dataset.
- Migrate records from one database to another.

.. _Installing:
  
Installing
----------

almirah can be installed with `pip <https://pip.pypa.io>`_:

.. code-block:: bash
		
		$ python -m pip install almirah

Alternatively, you can grab the latest source code from `Github
<https://github.com/girishmm/almirah>`_:

.. code-block:: bash

		$ git clone https://github.com/girishmm/almirah.git
		$ cd almirah
		$ pip install .

Usage
-----

The :doc:`user-guide` is the place to go to learn how to use the
libray and accomplish common dataset related tasks. If you have the
time, we recommend following the :doc:`tutorial` for a complete
overview.

almirah relies heavily on configs to guide its tasks. The
:doc:`writing-configs/index` page describes the possibilities in
detail.

The :doc:`reference/index` documentation provides API-level
documentation.

Can you use almirah to manage other datasets? Of course! Have a look
at the :ref:`translate_to_another_dataset` section for files to tweak
to achieve this.

If you want to access the CALM-Brain resource, please head over to the
`user guide <https://girishmm.github.io/calm-brain/user-guide.html>`_
for a walk-through. The `reference <https://girishmm.github.io/calm-brain/reference.html>`_
documentation provides details on the files and records available in
the dataset. If you have not heard of the resource, but would like to
know, please visit the `CALM-Brain`_ online page help acquaint you.

.. _CALM-Brain: https://www.calm-brain.ncbs.res.in/

Who uses almirah?
-----------------

almirah was primarily developed to support and maintain the data
generated by the CBM-ADBS study. But we believe it can aid with other
datasets too! Even non-neuroimaging ones!

If almirah was able to help with your dataset, we would love to hear
about it.

.. _translate_to_another_dataset:

Translate to another dataset
----------------------------

If your dataset is a BIDS dataset, congrats you are done! 🎉

The BIDS specification config is available in the repo and you can use
it.

If your dataset follows a different specification, describe it as a
config file by referring to :doc:`writing-configs/specification`. This
should allow filtering and querying of the dataset.

If you would like to organize data according to a described
specification, define rules according to :doc:`writing-configs/rules`.

If you need assistance migrating records from one database to another,
or one schema to another, :doc:`writing-configs/mapping` can guide
you.

If you need help writing a config file or would like to suggest an
improvement, please do reach out via the repo.

Dependencies
------------

`almirah`_ provides out-of-the-box routines for format conversion in
neuroimaging datasets. These are implemented as wrappers around other
standard libraries in different languages. These libraries might have
dependencies that are not resolved during `almirah`_ installation. The
pipelines and their respective externally installed dependencies are:

  * MRI format conversion         : `dcm2niix`_
  * MRI defacing                  : `FMRIB Software Library`_
  * MRI preprocessing             : `FreeSurfer`_, `Statistical Parametric Mapping`_
  * EEG format conversion         : `mne-bids`_
  * NIRS format conversion        : `mne-nirs`_
  * Eyetracking format conversion : `edf2asc`_

.. _edf2asc: https://www.sr-research.com/support/thread-7674.html   
.. _dcm2niix: https://github.com/rordenlab/dcm2niix
.. _mne-bids: https://mne.tools/mne-bids/stable/index.html
.. _mne-nirs: https://mne.tools/mne-nirs/stable/index.html
.. _FreeSurfer: https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/
.. _FMRIB Software Library: https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki
.. _Statistical Parametric Mapping: https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/

.. important::
   
   Though not mentioned explicitly, it is implied that it is necessary
   to have the language the library is implemented in installed. For
   example, `SPM`_ requires `MATLAB`_.

.. _SPM: https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/
.. _MATLAB: https://in.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html

License
-------

almirah is made available under the MIT License. For more details, see
`LICENSE <https://github.com/girishmm/almirah/blob/dev/LICENSE>`_.

Contributing
------------

We happily welcome contributions, please see :doc:`contributing` for
details.

Help and Support
----------------

We try to make almirah robust, but there might be things we missed. If it
does not meet your use case or you have trouble adapting it to your
dataset, please `write to us <girishmm@ncbs.res.in>`_ or open an issue
on the `repository <https://github.com/girishmm/almirah>`_ or drop by
`Github Discussions <https://github.com/girishmm/almirah/discussions>`_.

Citing
------

If you use almirah to help with your dataset, please consider citing this
repository until a journal article is specifically available for almirah.

Acknowledgements
----------------

almirah builds on other libraries and some parts are implemented as a
wrapper around modules in these libraries. Thanks to the developers,
maintainers, and contributors of these for the amazing documentation
and great work!

- mne
- mne-bids
- mne-nirs
- dcm2bids
- pybids  
- SQLAlchemy

.. rubric:: References

- Alexandre Gramfort, Martin Luessi, Eric Larson, Denis A. Engemann,
  Daniel Strohmeier, Christian Brodbeck, Roman Goj, Mainak Jas, Teon
  Brooks, Lauri Parkkonen, and Matti S. Hämäläinen. MEG and EEG data
  analysis with MNE-Python. Frontiers in Neuroscience,
  7(267):1–13, 2013. doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00267.
  
- Appelhoff, S., Sanderson, M., Brooks, T., Vliet, M., Quentin, R.,
  Holdgraf, C., Chaumon, M., Mikulan, E., Tavabi, K., Höchenberger,
  R., Welke, D., Brunner, C., Rockhill, A., Larson, E., Gramfort, A.,
  & Jas, M. (2019). MNE-BIDS: Organizing electrophysiological data
  into the BIDS format and facilitating their analysis. Journal of
  Open Source Software, 4:1896. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01896.
  
- Robert Luke, Eric D. Larson, Maureen J. Shader, Hamish Innes-Brown,
  Lindsey Van Yper, Adrian K. C. Lee, Paul F. Sowman, David
  McAlpine. Analysis methods for measuring passive auditory fNIRS
  responses generated by a block-design paradigm. Neurophotonics,
  Vol. 8, Issue 2, 025008 (May 2021). doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1117/1.NPh.8.2.025008.
  
- Boré, A., Guay, S., Bedetti, C., Meisler, S., &
  GuenTher, N. (2023). Dcm2Bids (Version 3.0.2) [Computer
  software]. doi: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8306314.
  
- Yarkoni et al., (2019). PyBIDS: Python tools for BIDS
  datasets. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(40), 1294.  doi:
  https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01294.

- Michael Bayer. SQLAlchemy. In Amy Brown and Greg Wilson, editors,
  The Architecture of Open Source Applications Volume II: Structure,
  Scale, and a Few More Fearless Hacks 2012 http://aosabook.org.
